SIDPLAYER NEWS #13  June 1987 

STORY NOTES FOR "THE HORROR" 

"The Horror" is an original composition by Brian Szepatowski that plays for 
fifteen minutes.  It is a Sidplayer song that comes on the disk for the 
Enhanced Sidplayer.  The work is a story about a Hero and an entity known as 
the Horror who fight using psi power.  This documentation file presents the 
story by describing the action at various points in the song. 

0:00  This is the beginning of the awakening.  The wind is blowing and you can 
hear the trees rustling.  There are people walking.  They find a cave opening 
and walk down into the cave.  They start chanting spells and incantations. 

1:18  The Horror awakens.  He starts exercising and testing his power because 
he has been dormant for so long.  He snickers. 

1:44  This starts the Carefree Theme.  People in the town are going about their 
business, shopping for Twinkies in a grocery store. 

2:18  The bass line tells when the Horror shows up.  He starts stalking people, 
looking out from behind bushes, cars, etc.. 

2:31  The Horror begins going after all his prey.  There is lots of death and 
destruction. 

3:07  This starts the Helpless Theme.  People are trying to fight back against 
the Horror but there is nothing they can do.  They are powerless against the 
psi power of the Horror. 

3:20  This is the Sadness Theme.  The Horror has had his fun, so he goes off, 
while the people are mourning. 

3:52  The Horror laughs sadistically. 

3:55  The Hero begins his training in psi power. 

4:26  The Hero begins more serious training. 

4:42  The Hero is completing his training. 

5:10  The Hero goes off to battle. 

5:29  This is the beginning of the confrontation between the Horror and the 
Hero.  They are sizing each other up, being obnoxious to each other, and trying 
to stare each other down.  They have a "little discussion." 

5:59  The battle is beginning.  The Hero's theme pops in occasionally but 
mostly it is the Horror's theme, because he is mostly in control. 

6:14  This is the actual start of the mind to mind battle.  The first move is 
made by the Horror. 

6:47  The battle continues.  The Hero is beaten to rags and is mostly defeated. 

7:02  While the Helpless Theme plays, the Hero watches as the Horror does more 
damage.  There is more death and destruction as the Horror does more of his 
sadistic work.  The Horror wants to rub it in, and have the Hero see this. 

8:00  The Hero decides that okay, he has to fight - he has no choice.  He is 
the only one who can stop the Horror.  He pulls himself together and finds 
within himself the power to do what he has to do, that nobody else can do. 

8:10  This is the beginning of the second battle.  The Hero is in control most 
of the time. 

8:36  The Hero is determined to win and destroy the Horror.  While the Serious 
Training Theme plays, the Hero does the most damage to the Horror.  The Horror 
isn't able to do too much back. 

9:15  The Horror says "no" and tries to come back. 

9:30  Both of them are fighting.  The Hero was getting beat on so he starts 
moving out of the way, and the fight turns back to his side. 

9:39  The good guy wins out and gets on top. 

9:55  The Hero works on finishing what he had started. 

10:06  The Horror makes a last ditch effort before he gets destroyed. 

10:11  The Hero says no and destroys him. 

10:39  This is the moment of victory.  The Hero has destroyed the Horror 
completely, or so he thinks. 

10:46  This is the sunrise and clearing of all of the darkness to light. 

11:04  The music moves into the Resolution Theme.  People are getting up, 
emerging from the rubble, looking around, and seeing what is going on. 

11:41  The Hero walks out of the smoke and fire.  People are clapping and 
cheering. 

11:56  People are picking up the dead people, remembering what they went 
through, and remembering all their losses. 

12:12  It's party time.  There is a victory celebration. 

13:58  The Hero turns away and looks off.  He has a distant look in his eyes as 
he remembers what he went through. 

14:18  The Hero returns to the party. 

14:46  The Horror is off in infinity. 

15:00  Of course, you can never completely destroy evil.  The Horror laughs his 
sadistic laugh.  He's not dead. 

15:10  The End. 