SIDNEWS #14 - INSTRUCTIONS FOR PLAYING SONGS ON MIDIPLAYER 
By Craig Chamberlain  10/25/88 


COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
The Enhanced Sidplayer Promotional Player, including the MIDI edition, is 
copyrighted by COMPUTE! Publications, Inc. and is not in the Public Domain.  
Permission is granted to freely distribute the program, however, provided that 
it is not modified and not sold. 


INTRODUCTION 
The MIDIPLAYER program plays Enhanced Sidplayer songs on any MIDI-capable 
synthesizer.  Besides sending MIDI information to make a synthesizer play the 
notes in a song, the player also supports other MIDI features such as program 
changes, controller changes, different channel modes, and different keyboard 
velocities.  The player even supports real-time control to help synchronize a 
drum machine with the synthesizer. 

The first release of MIDIPLAYER works with all MIDI synthesizers and has the 
ability to load patch files for non-handshaking synthesizers.  Another version 
of MIDIPLAYER is being released to support patch file loading on the Casio CZ 
series including the CZ-101, CZ-1000, CZ-2000, CZ-3000, CZ-5000 and CZ-1 
synthesizers.  See the document "SIDNEWS #17 - Instructions for MIDIPLAYER CZ 
Version" for information on the CZ version of MIDIPLAYER. 

MIDIPLAYER works with MIDI interfaces manufactured by Passport, Sequential, and 
Datel, and with other compatible interfaces including Sonus and Dr. T. 

Please note that the Enhanced Sidplayer music system was not designed to be a 
full MIDI system, and the MIDIPLAYER is not intended to provide a full MIDI 
composing environment.  The Sidplayer Editor does not accept note entry by 
synthesizer keyboard, so using the system for MIDI composing would be rather 
awkward, although people who have only a synthesizer module with no keyboard 
may find the system very useful.  MIDIPLAYER merely gives you the added 
capability of playing Sidplayer songs on a MIDI system, if you wish. 

This document explains how to use the MIDIPLAYER to play songs on a MIDI 
system.  A companion document, "SIDNEWS #15 - Instructions for Creating Songs 
for MIDIPLAYER" tells how to edit Enhanced Sidplayer songs to take advantage of 
special MIDI features. 


WHAT IS MIDI 
MIDI is an acronym standing for Musical Instrument Digital Interface.  It is a 
standard agreed upon by several manufacturers about how different pieces of 
equipment, including synthesizers and computers, should communicate with each 
other.  The standard specifies how the physical connections should work, and 
how data should be transmitted over those connections. 

An example of another important standard in the computer world is ASCII.  The 
ASCII code specifies which numbers stand for which characters on computers, 
printers, and other devices.  Because the manufacturers have agreed to follow 
the ASCII standard, your computer can work with a printer from almost any 
manufacturer (although an interface between the computer and the printer may be 
needed). 

MIDI works in a similar way.  A MIDI-equipped synthesizer can be used to make 
another MIDI-equipped synthesizer play notes or change settings, even if the 
two synthesizers are made by different companies.  Alternatively, a computer 
with a MIDI interface can control a MIDI-equipped synthesizer. 

If you are interested in learning more about MIDI, some magazines that cover 
MIDI are Keyboard and Electronic Musician.  Several books about MIDI have also 
been published.  Or you may contact the International MIDI Association (the 
IMA): 

  International MIDI Association 
  5316 W. 57th Street 
  Los Angeles, CA 90056 


NECESSARY EQUIPMENT 
First you need a synthesizer that supports MIDI.  One model that has been very 
popular with Commodore users is Casio's CZ-101.  The Casio CZ-1000 is identical 
to the CZ-101 except that it offers a full-size keyboard.  These synthesizers 
offered great value at a relatively low cost, but Casio has discontinued the CZ 
series so it is getting harder to find CZ models.  Some more expensive 
synthesizers used by many professional musicians include the Yamaha DX-7 and 
the Roland D-50.  An exciting new synthesizer is the M1 from Korg.  There are 
also several other MIDI synthesizers available from various manufacturers 
including Casio, Yamaha, Roland, and Korg. 

Instead of a full synthesizer, you can use a "module" or "rack-mount" unit.  A 
module consists of a synthesizer's sound-producing circuitry but without a 
keyboard, for a savings of a couple hundred dollars.  Modules are useful to 
people who already have a MIDI keyboard but want more sounds, or who will be 
using a computer to play the music.  Some popular modules include the FB01 from 
Yamaha and the MT-32 from Roland. 

You will also need a MIDI interface cartridge designed for the Commodore 64.  
MIDIPLAYER supports the interfaces sold by Passport Designs, Sequential 
Circuits, Inc., and Datel.  There are other interfaces which are compatible 
with these models.  For example, the Sonus interface is compatible with the 
Passport interface and is available by mail order for around $65.  The Model-T 
interface from Dr. T is compatible with the Sequential interface. 

If you get the Datel interface, you may experience some reliability problems.  
The following information from Frank Prindle may be helpful:  "The interface, 
as sold as of July 1988, has a design flaw which requires changing a trace on 
the board to obtain reliable operation.  The enable (E) pin of the 6850 UART is 
currently wired to I/O2 on the 64 bus; it must be rewired to Phi2 (the 6502 
clock line).  Apparently, the manufacturer screwed up the board design when 
someone misread Phi2 on the schematic as I/O2.  Once I fixed the wiring error, 
the interface has worked flawlessly." 

A MIDI cable is needed to connect the interface to the synthesizer.  The cable 
has a 5-pin male DIN plug on each end.  MIDI cables may come with the 
interface. 

The MIDIPLAYER program is also needed.  The non-handshaking version can be used 
to play regular Sidplayer and Enhanced Sidplayer songs on any MIDI synthesizer. 

The use of a MIDI drum machine is optional.  MIDIPLAYER supports drum machines, 
but the drum machine won't be activated by a song unless the song contains 
special MIDI commands to start the drum machine and send clock timing pulses to 
it. 


SETUP 
First turn off all of your equipment.  Insert the MIDI interface in the 
Commodore 64 cartridge slot.  Use the MIDI cable to connect the MIDI OUT of the 
interface to the MIDI IN of the synthesizer.  Hook up the audio output of the 
synthesizer to a stereo or your computer's monitor.  Now turn on the MIDI 
synthesizer and the other equipment.  When you press the keys on the 
synthesizer, you should hear notes play. 

Next, load the MIDIPLAYER program.  List the program on the screen and examine 
line 30: 

  30 POKE 780,0:REM 0 = PASSPORT, 1 = SEQUENTIAL, 2 = DATEL 

If you have a Passport or compatible interface, the POKE value should be 0.  If 
you have a Sequential or compatible interface, the POKE value should be 1.  If 
you have a Datel interface, the POKE value should be 2.  If the current number 
is not correct, change it and press Return to re-enter the line.  Be careful to 
change only the one character, so that the length of the program line does not 
change. 

  INTERFACE                       POKE VALUE 
  Passport/Sonus/compatibles      0 
  Sequential/Model-T/compatibles  1 
  Datel                           2 

If you do not know which model your interface is compatible with, make your 
best guess.  If the player later freezes up when it starts to play a song, try 
selecting another type of interface. 

Now examine line 31 of the program: 

  31 POKE 781,0:REM 0 = PATCH FILE LOADING DISABLED, 1 = ENABLED 

If you want to disable the loading of patch files, the POKE value should be 0.  
If you want to enable patch file loading so that various synthesizer parameters 
are set before a song plays, the POKE value should be 1.  Patch files are 
explained in more detail later in this document. 

Again, if the current number is not correct, change the number in the line and 
re-enter the line, being careful not to change the line length. 

Next look at line 32: 

  32 POKE 782,000:REM MSEC TRANSMISSION DELAY 

The POKE value specifies the length of a delay in milliseconds between the 
transmission of MIDI commands when a patch file is loaded.  The value can range 
from 0 to 255, with 0 meaning no delay.  If patch file loading is enabled and 
you find that your synthesizer cannot receive long patch files at full speed, 
you may have to experiment with delay values to slow the transmission down to a 
rate that the synthesizer can handle.  If patch file loading is disabled, the 
POKE value here does not matter. 

Finally, look at line 40 of the program: 

  40 SYS 2689,01,02,03:REM DEFAULT CHANNELS FOR VOICES 1, 2, AND 3 

The three numbers after the SYS address specify the MIDI channels to be used 
for Sidplayer song voices 1, 2, and 3, respectively.  MIDI channels are 
numbered 1 to 16.  On some synthesizers it is more convenient to use channels 
other than channels 1 to 3, so you can change the default channels if you like. 
 If your synthesizer can receive on only one channel, you can set all three 
voices to have the same channel number. 

If you have made any changes to the above POKE and SYS values, you may wish at 
this time to save the modified version of the player to the disk, so that you 
don't have to make the same changes every time you run the program. 

The use of a drum machine is optional.  If you want to hook up a drum machine, 
use a MIDI cable to connect MIDI THRU on the synthesizer to MIDI IN on the drum 
machine.  If the synthesizer does not have MIDI THRU but the drum machine does, 
connect MIDI OUT from the interface to MIDI IN on the drum machine, and connect 
MIDI THRU on the drum machine to MIDI IN on the synthesizer.  If neither unit 
has MIDI THRU, you will need to buy a MIDI splitter to split the MIDI OUT from 
the interface into two lines, one for MIDI IN on the synthesizer and the other 
for MIDI IN on the drum machine. 


PLAYING A SONG 
Run the MIDIPLAYER program and make sure that the synthesizer is turned on.  If 
you must press any special buttons to make your synthesizer accept MIDI input, 
press them now. 

Use the cursor keys to move to a song, and press the Return key to select the 
song and make it load and play.  You should hear the song played on the 
synthesizer. 

If you do not hear anything, either there is a bad connection or you need to 
set your synthesizer so that it will accept MIDI input.  If the computer 
totally freezes up, you probably need to switch the selected interface type. 

On some synthesizers it may be necessary to turn on Omni mode or some other 
special mode in order to hear the song.  Or you may need to change the default 
channels in line 40 of the player program so that all three voices transmit on 
the same channel. 


INTERPRETATION OF SIDPLAYER COMMANDS 
MIDIPLAYER processes Enhanced Sidplayer commands that control the tempo and 
durations of notes, repetition of music, envelope hold and release points, and 
transposition.  It ignores Enhanced Sidplayer commands that set specific SID 
chip values, such as the waveform or envelope attack, decay, sustain, and 
release values, and also ignores commands for special effects such as vibrato, 
portamento, detuning, sync mode, and ring modulation.  If you want a MIDIPLAYER 
song to change sounds when played on a synthesizer, or control effects like 
vibrato and portamento, special MIDI commands must be added to the song.  
Instructions on how to do this are given in a companion document. 


PROBLEM SONGS 
Because MIDIPLAYER does interpret the Enhanced Sidplayer pitch transposing 
commands, some songs created for Sidplayer may not sound very good on 
MIDIPLAYER.  If a song uses sync mode or ring modulation, two voices play the 
same notes, but with one voice transposed up a certain number of half steps.  
This advanced technique can sound very good on the SID chip when the sync or 
ring modulation mode is turned on, but can cause the transposed voice to sound 
out of tune when the sync and ring modulation modes are turned off on the SID 
chip, or when the voice is played on MIDIPLAYER which ignores the sync mode and 
ring modulation commands. 

Often, songs which sound mediocre on Sidplayer, because they just use the 
default settings and don't use any special SID chip features, sound the best on 
MIDIPLAYER, while the songs that sound the best on Sidplayer, because they have 
been optimized to take full advantage of the SID chip, typically do not play 
very well on MIDIPLAYER. 

Songs which contain special effects such as sync mode or ring modulation 
transposing, detuning, or ABS commands for portamento effects, and which 
therefore don't play well on MIDIPLAYER, can be edited to remove those effects 
and make the songs suitable for playing on a synthesizer. 

Another possible problem with playing Sidplayer songs on MIDIPLAYER concerns 
the release point, set by the PNT and HLD commands.  If the release point is 
set too high, and a synthesizer voice is playing a tone with a slow attack 
rate, you may not hear the majority of the notes in the voice.  That's because 
the note is being released before the sound has built up loud enough.  You 
either need to use a tone with a faster attack rate, or edit the song to set 
the release point later. 

There can also be a problem if the release point is set too low.  If the 
synthesizer misses a few notes occasionally, it could be that the release is 
happening too late, and you will have to edit the song to change the release 
point. 

One other thing you may notice is that some synthesizers have a limited octave 
range.  When a synthesizer with a limited range receives a note with a pitch 
outside that range, it will transpose the note into the nearest playable octave 
and then play it.  The Casio CZ synthesizers, for example, can play notes only 
in a five octave range, although Sidplayer can handle notes in an eight octave 
range. 


PATCH FILES 
The non-handshaking version of MIDIPLAYER has the capability of loading patch 
files along with music, words, and picture files.  This lets a person creating 
a song for MIDIPLAYER distribute sounds along with the music, so that you can 
hear the song the exact same way as the person who created it. 

A "patch" is a definition of how a voice should sound, consisting of waveform, 
envelope, and other information for the synthesizer.  The patch data can be 
stored in a file called a "patch file" which can be loaded by a computer.  A 
special MIDI command called the System Exclusive message can then be used to 
transmit the patch data from the computer to a synthesizer. 

Since the format of patch definitions varies from one model of synthesizer to 
another, the non-handshaking version of MIDIPLAYER supports generic patch files 
that contain MIDI messages.  The MIDI messages can be System Exclusive messages 
to define patches, or any other MIDI messages.  A patch file intended for use 
with a particular synthesizer model would contain System Exclusive messages 
appropriate to that model. 

A patch file for a song is indicated by the filename extension ".MDI".  The 
player loads the patch file containing the MIDI messages and transmits them to 
the synthesizer before it loads the other files for the song. 

Some synthesizers require a special dialog between the computer and synthesizer 
for a System Exclusive message to transfer patch data.  If your synthesizer 
requires this special handshaking, you will not be able to transmit patch data 
to the synthesizer using the non-handshaking version of MIDIPLAYER (although a 
patch file containing MIDI messages other than System Exclusive messages will 
still work).  The Casio CZ synthesizers use handshaking to transfer patch data, 
and the CZ version of MIDIPLAYER has been written to work with this 
handshaking. 

MIDIPLAYER will not load patch files if patch file loading is turned off.  As 
was explained in the "Setup" section of this document, a POKE value of 1 must 
be used in line 31 to enable patch file loading.  The POKE value 0 disables the 
loading of patch files, even if they exist on the disk. 


PATCH FILE LOADING ERRORS 
If there is a problem in loading a patch file, the program will stop the song 
loading and print a message saying that there was an error in loading the patch 
file. 

Be sure you have the synthesizer turned on before you load a song, especially 
one with a patch file. 


CAUTION ON LOADING PATCH FILES 
When MIDIPLAYER loads a patch file and redefines the voices, it may overwrite 
existing voice definitions.  If you don't want to lose the existing 
definitions, either save them in a patch file by using a patch file librarian 
program, or run the player with the patch file loading turned off. 


DRUM MACHINE PLAYING 
A drum machine can be used with a song only if the song has been specially 
edited to support a drum machine.  Furthermore, the song may have been edited 
with a particular drum machine model in mind, and the drum machine will 
probably have to be programmed with one or more sequences.  The person who 
creates a song that is to be used with a drum machine will have to provide 
information on how to use the drum machine with the song. 


RESPECT FOR SIDPLAYER ARTISTS 
I hope that nobody is offended that Sidplayer songs they have created can be 
played on a MIDI synthesizer.  When you are playing a Sidplayer song on 
MIDIPLAYER, please keep in mind the fact that the person who created the song 
may have worked very hard to get it to sound a certain way on the SID chip. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Ruth Gordon, Jerry Kovarsky, Paul Labeaud, Frank Prindle, 
Jon Rafalak and Bob Retelle for their assistance in the development of 
MIDIPLAYER. 


I hope you enjoy MIDIPLAYER! 